Obtaining and manipulating video/audio from source can be achieved by means of the following tools:

mplayer (DVD player/ripper)
cdparanoia (CD ripper)
sox (sound translator)
audacity (audio editor)



In order to encode using the available plugins provided with LiVES you will need the following video processors:

transcode (MPEG-4, MJPEG)
ffmpeg (MJPEG, DIVX 4/5)
mplayer (MJPEG)
encodedv (DV)
mjpegtools (MPEG-1/2)
sswf (Flash)


If you would like to create MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 files and burn them unto a VCD/SVCD/DVD-capable player you will also need the following:

vcdimager (VCD/SVCD) (official site seems to be down, try here)
libdvdread (DVD)
dvdauthor (DVD)
cdrdao (CD burner)
dvd+rw-tools (DVD burner)
cdrtools (burner, optional)


Although MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 are both mature codecs and extremely widespread, they are rather dated. Similarly the MP2 sound format leaves a lot to be desired (MP3 is much improved, although heavily patent encumbered). The tools below, however, allow the creation/encapsulation of an MPEG-4 compatible stream with Ogg Vorbis audio. The resulting Ogg Media (OGM) and Matroska (MKV) files are of better quality and smaller footprint than what the MPEG-1/MP2 combination can offer:

vorbis tools (OGG)
lame (MP3)
ogmtools (OGM)
mkvtoolnix (MKV)
matroska libs (MKV)
xvid libraries (OGM/MKV)



Finally, here are some free codecs. Currently the Theora/Vorbis/OGG format is recommended: it is fairly stable and absolutely libre. The other formats are also free but under very heavy development (and x264 in particular looks amazing) and not really recommended for production use (but feel free to test!)

theora libraries (OGG)
dirac libraries (DRC)
x264 (h.264) libraries (H.264/AVI)

Note: if using theora I strongly suggest using the MMX version which is about four times faster:

theora-MMX libraries (OGG)

The trade-off is that these may not play out-of-the-box for many computer users, in particular those who are not running MPlayer. There are, nonetheless, guides for Windows users available at:

Lazy Man's Guide to Ogg Media (OGM Files)
Lazy Man's Guide to MKV

The easiest way to play Theora/Vorbis/OGG files under Linux is by downloading the Helix Player which will work "out of the box" if you install the RPM (or compile the source). For Windows users RealPlayer will work just as well, as long as you install the Xiph plugin. Linux/*BSD users can also view the clips using MPlayer or the excellent Kaffeine Player.

helix player
realplayer
xiph plugin
kaffeine
xine  
